Preface

The analysis of transport institutions in Pakistan suggests that transportation solutions predominantly stem from the dissemination of knowledge from developed nations to developing ones, mainly facilitated by international development organizations. In the absence of any local research, this dissemination led to a discrepancy between imported transport policies and local requirements (Imran, 2010). This necessitates local research aimed at formulating policy interventions to address the escalating rates of car ownership and the declining air quality index. To fill the research gap within the transportation domain, this publication consolidates dissertations focusing on public transportation services in twin cities, encompassing impact evaluation of existing infrastructure, discussing requisite regulatory frameworks and recommending some alternative sustainable solutions like shared bus services to the highly budgeted metros. The proposed recommendations offer valuable insights applicable to any transportation policy framework.

In recent years, in several major cities, billions of rupees were spent on transport infrastructure such as roads, highways and motorways. The severity is evident as almost 80.35 % of the PSDP comprised of infrastructure projects alone in 2020 (Haque et al, 2020). And this expenditure was not aligned to the accessibility view of urban transport planning. Resultantly, no city in Pakistan provides citywide bus service (Haque and Rizwan, 2020). Recently the Bus based Rapid Transit was introduced in some major cities with huge budgets of around PKR 40 billion, exceeding the total transport budget of that city, and catering to mere 5-10 % of the population. Travelling in those elevated and air-conditioned buses one wonders was this the best solution, what was the professional assessment of the possible alternative solutions for public transport and does this solve the accessibility issues at all for a resource constraint economy (Haque and Rizwan, 2020). Now the local governments are grappling with the sustainability of these motorways and escalated infrastructures as the economic feasibility of these projects is tied to huge governmental subsidies. The subsidy per rider is around PKR 54.19 against the ticket of PKR 20 in case of Metro Bus Service (MBS) amounting to PKR 2 billion annually.

With an overall focus on the impact of the MBS on female mobility in Islamabad-Rawalpindi, Tayyeba Khalil explored female experience (before and after the provision) of PMBS related to accessibility, tangibility, affordability, safety, reliability, and change in social and economic activity. The overall finding of this research indicates that the metro bus service in Islamabad- Rawalpindi has brought an improvement in the service quality of public transportation for female passengers of all the three groups – working women, students and casual travelers, leading to ease in mobility of the female population which was absent previously.

The National Transport policy of Pakistan (2018) highlights the importance of transport sector as a driver of socioeconomic progress. However, it makes no mention of problems being faced by disabled persons who face social exclusion in the wake of unavailability of public transport and accessible infrastructure. The developed countries have established world class transportation facilities that ensures inclusion of all segment of society including children, women, elderly and disabled persons. Following the footsteps of developed world, mass transit system is being pursued in various metropolitan cities of Pakistan to ensure inclusion of people including women and disabled persons in providing them safe, cheap and time saving travel. However, Zain Ul Abideen finds that MBS system is not ensuring accessibility to women and disabled persons to greater extent owing to poor planning, inaccessible infrastructure and its operation on specific route. Disabled persons cannot access the Metro Bus owing to inaccessible entrances, footways and malfunctioning of lifts and elevators. Moreover, the attitude and non-cooperative behavior of people also contributes to social exclusion of females and disabled persons. Likewise, disabled persons implored that captains of Uber & Careem refused to take accept their ride as their wheelchair would damage their vehicles. Thus the non-cooperative behavior and negative attitude of people also contributes to social exclusion. The BRT is safer for females yet the provision of CCTV cameras, complaint mechanisms, quotas and waiting areas for disabled persons can lead to an inclusive transport system.

Understanding mode shifts helps urban planners and policymakers make informed decisions about transportation infrastructure development. It allows them to allocate resources effectively and design transportation systems that cater to the needs of the population. Rehana Ali Naqvi used logistic regression method to analyze the survey data associated with the metro bus service in Islamabad- Rawalpindi, twin cities in Pakistan and examine mode shift behavior for shift to metro service for public transport, own transport and taxi users. Factors that are statistically significant in affecting model shifts to metro bus service include trip distance, travel cost and travel time of commuters. From the survey data of metro bus service, it is found that 18% of metro passengers were former public transport users and own transport and taxi users together comprised 17% metro travelers. In the prior studies, the modal shift was 50% from bus and train users and 27% from car users (Knowles, 1996). The new metro in Athens has attracted 53% of bus passengers and 16% of former car travelers (Golias, 2002). In the Madrid subway project, 50% of passengers were former bus users, and 26% of passengers used to travel by car (Monzon, 2000). Finally, 69% of Tramlink passengers were bus users and 19% of passengers were former auto travelers in Croydon (Copley et al. 2002). The comparisons among Pakistan metro bus and other cities indicate that mode shifts to newly introduced metro from public transport closely is lower in Pakistan. Also, women travelers are more likely than men to use metro in Pakistan. Lastly the study found that metro bus service has replaced around 700 public vehicles from the route of metro bus. It is estimated that approximately 800 metric tons of carbon emissions are reduced from the city so far.

A sustainable transportation system is a key to a sustainable city. The majority of sustainability indices show that existing urban travel habits are unsustainable. Concerns about excessive traffic congestion, air pollution, and energy concerns prompted policymakers to place a greater emphasis on MBS to alleviate environmental and traffic challenges (Deng & Nelson, 2013). Muhammad Hamza Saeed uses remote sensing and a survey-based technique to assess the environmental benefits of the Murree Road MBS. MBS has a substantial influence on decreasing environmental emissions, according to the research. The environmental conditions have improved since the start of MBS at Murree Road, according to the NDVI and LST techniques employed in this study. Before the commencement of MBS at Murree Road, the average LST in this region was 36.50516, but it began to decline from 2016 to 2018, with the average LST temperature falling to 27.46416, 25.64227, and 19.54895. This demonstrates that LST at Murree Road has reduced by 16.95621, or almost 17 °C, following the deployment of MBS, which is a significant shift in temperature dynamics. However, in 2019, the LST temperature increased from 19.54895 to 23.28982, possibly due to an increase in the number of cars in the investigated area, or reduction in rainfall during that year. A survey of the users revealed that MBS has been used more frequently by middle-aged people (26-32). The elderly was in small numbers since accessing entry and departure points, both below and above ground, was difficult for them. The females were unwilling to answer the questions.

Although the introduction of EVs alone is not the only or entirely solution to attaining a clean and green environment in the nation, taking these actions will help us move closer to an environment with less emissions. The aim of this study is to help implement a green transportation system in Islamabad and Rawalpindi. In this study Farzana Rubab compares the financial and environmental costs of using electric, diesel, and solar buses. It also assesses the viability of using suitable electric vehicles (EVs) for Islamabad and Rawalpindi’s public transit systems and considers several technological choices. Solar and electric buses are superior to diesel bus while considering overall environmental footprint and impacts. As both solar and electric buses have almost zero emission technology during operation. At present moment or initially, cost-feasibility is positive for diesel bus due to low prices of vehicle in comparison with solar or electric bus and cost-feasibility is negative for electric and solar bus due huge capital expenditure (CAPEX) requirement in the beginning. In a long run, social feasibility will be positive for electric and solar bus. As human being’s attitudes towards environment friendly appliances, equipment and machines are quite optimistic. Behaviors of humans towards energy efficient and environmentally friendly solutions are increasing day by day as shown in upcoming few examples such as, preferring wind or solar energy sources over thermal, replacing old conventional lights with LED. These positive behaviors depict that people will move or prefer electric or solar bus over the diesel bus. Therefore, in the future, social feasibility of diesel bus will be negative. The detailed analysis and study of both fossil fuel and electric vehicles differentiate the use of both vehicles. The electric vehicles are expensive but their prices are coming down. With new Chinese automotive brands, the prices have become equal to or less than fossil fuel vehicles. Electric vehicles also have less maintenance cost, low fuel cost depends on the source of electricity production, and completely environment friendly, and also have a more safety factor. Although fossil fuel vehicles are cheap but have a high maintenance cost, more fuel cost and burning of fuel leaves behind the dangerous carbon, Sulfur, and fine particulate matter which are destroying the environment, endangers the human lives, and economy of Pakistan. It is concluded from this study that using the electric car in Pakistan can be very useful, cost-saving, environment saving, fuel-saving, and life-saving as well. The increasing population and increasing number of cars on roads are creating serious problems for the nation. As the world is moving towards renewable sources of energy so, it is the responsibility of our government to invest in using the new technology resources to save the lives and environment of Pakistan. In the light of the current automotive market, new electric car manufacturing is encouraged and a tax-free import of electric vehicles is allowed.

Saadia Khizar highlights the concept of shared mobility and bus transport system. Shared mobility is defined as the optimal utilization of a vehicle/vehicles of any kind. It means allowing several people or goods to travel in the same transport at the same time to reduce individual kilometer travelled. For sustainability and less environment emissions, it is better to allow one vehicle on road than 10 individual cars. Creating a public transportation system based on shared mobility could result in the sustainable growth of our country’s transport sector. Countries like India and China are moving forward by creating shared mobility-based transport of all form, from cars to minibuses. Pakistan too can create such a system and this study will, similarly, try to prove that theory. Statistically, around 200+ buses or minibuses 30–40-seater are currently operating in Islamabad and Rawalpindi under the indirect authority of varies government or semi government universities but are not operating at full utility as they cater to student or university demand only other than that, the bus is either vacant or non-operational. This study plans to create efficient and effective use of already available recourse, Public and Semi-Public Institute’s owned Buses used for individual transport (operational university buses), to empower the population of two cities by increasing their mobility. Increasing the utility of these buses by employing them for our public transport system is a sustainable idea like any ride sharing system. The routes of this study were determined based on common patterns and travel density of each union council of twin cities. The study included designs based on both inter and intracity transportation system where minor trip generator was mostly intercity and major trip generator were intracity. The revenue earned from the implementation of this bus transport system can be used for enhancing and updating the transport sector in the future. One of the future benefits of this plan is decrease in the traffic congestions and improved road condition, not to mention, the decrease in parking issues.

A study on traffic congestion in Beijing revealed that school trips are the major contributor to traffic congestion in peak hours (Lu et al., 2017) Similar pattern has been observed with respect to school trips in India and Sri Lanka (Dias et al., 2022; Singh & Vasudevan, 2018). Therefore, it is pertinent to study school transport issues, particular modes and travel behavior. In terms of mode choice, while being unregulated and privately operated school vans were found to be the most opted for mode choice for school trips in Kandy, Sri Lanka (Dias et al., 2022). Alishba Naeem Ansari postulates that Likewise, in Islamabad, school vans are privately operated and unregulated, second most used mode of transport among private school children (Zafar et al., 2015). Although school vans fill the gap in provision of school transport, the issues of quality and safety along with problems of multiplicity of operators pose governance challenges and negative externalities. Hence, despite safety, overcrowding and comfort concerns, many children in both government and private schools rely on these private vehicles for commute. This research investigated parents and children’s views and behavior of this mode of transport and engaged school management as one of the stakeholders and incorporated their views as well. The major safety concern remains the use of CNG cylinders. Exploring school transport regulations in other countries, the study identifies that urban transport regulations are not entirely enforced on privately operated school vans. The school vans in other countries are required to at least register with the regional transport authority if they comply with school transport safety standards. In Pakistan, no such requirement is there for anyone engaged in this business. There is a need for rules and regulations that set safety standards as a school transport vehicle, driver registration and vetting as a school transport driver, seating space management and regular vehicle fitness inspection. Also, there is no data available on school transport vehicle related accidents in Pakistan, the gravity of the situation is yet not understood among policy makers. Although the CDA traffic engineering cell is responsible for conducting transport studies due to human and capital resource constraints these studies are not being conducted frequently.

As the global landscape transitions towards the fourth generation of ridesharing, Pakistan is initiating its journey, initially adopting the third generation. Saba and Zainab posit that however, by progressively integrating bike-sharing systems across different cities and educational institutions, Pakistan can expedite its transition to the fourth generation. Though there is a complete disconnect and our cities rely heavily on motorbikes instead of bicycles and there are hardly any properly designed bicycle tracks (Haque and Rizwan, 2020), the implementation of bike-sharing systems in public universities and schools would be a transformative force in Pakistan specially addressing the first and the last mile mobility issues. This shift holds immense potential to alleviate congestion, promote the transition from private vehicles to public transport, and reduce reliance on conventional fuels like petrol. While initial investment is required, successful implementation promises ease of traffic congestion during peak school hours.

Around the globe, governments have been facilitating the transition by adopting measures such as providing financial incentives and subsidies for EVS, expanding charging infrastructure networks, and supporting R&D for battery technology advancements. They have also been encouraging the EV industry through subsidies and regulations, which include tax incentives, grants, and rebates to make EVs more affordable for consumers. Government regulations and targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions have played a significant role in the transition to EVs. Many countries have set ambitious goals to phase out the production and sale of internal combustion engine vehicles in the coming years. These targets have further accelerated the adoption of electric vehicles globally. Saba and Aamina discuss the coherence between the electric vehicle policy and the challenges in EV adoption in Pakistan.