Three and a half year are more than enough to hold the PTI government responsible for all the misdeeds

Does the PTI government want to fill up peoples’ stomachs with anti-corruption slogans? The government will blame the previous governments for bad governance and mismanagement for how long? Is the sun of Imran Khan’s government about to set?

The PTI claims the opposition leaders are corrupt, and if they come to power, they will plunder the national exchequer and ruin the economy. Agree that Pakistan cannot progress unless corruption is dismantled. But the prime minister fails to understand the miseries ordinary people have faced during the past three and a half years due to inflation, poverty, and corruption from those in his ranks. As a result, the 220 million people of Pakistan are suffering.

The most disheartening aspect of this political fiasco is that the PTI is not learning from mistakes. Had it focused on ameliorating the socio-economic conditions of people instead of targeting key opposition leaders by using NAB and FIA, Pakistan would have ranked better than 144 th on the human development index.

Before assuming power, a leader must have a dream. Imran had the vision of Naya Pakistan based on Riyast-e-Madinah in his head. A beautiful dream indeed. Riyasat-e-Madinah was the first-ever welfare state where decisions were based on consultation. But this government never took the opposition leaders on board to resolve the state issues. It always held the opposition leaders are corrupt and not worth collaborating with.

Now people are not concerned about who is a thief or a police, they want their basic needs to be met. For how long will the present government experiment with the poor? Are three and a half years not enough to hold them accountable?

The PTI government keeps blaming the previous governments for all the evils prevalent in the country today. Why did it drag itself into dirty politics where everything was on the edge in the first place?

It is said, “we learn from history that we do not learn from history”. A person is considered wise if he learns from others’ mistakes. PM should keep in mind that “absolute power corrupts absolutely”.

The PTI government keeps blaming the previous governments for all the evils prevalent in the country today. Why did it drag itself into dirty politics where everything was on the edge in the first place? What tabdeeli did this government bring than poverty, inflation, devaluation of currency, loans, and foreign debts?

It pledged millions of jobs and millions of homes for poor. It’s supporters said Imran is a bold, honorable leader” who is being punished for standing up against the forces that be to restore the country’s sovereignty. Proof of this defiance would be his statement “Absolutely Not” to the US, but there is little evidence, public or otherwise, of the US having made any demand. The prime minister seems aware of the challenges ahead and in desperation is playing the religion card, ‘ Amr bil Ma’aroof’.

The no-confidence motion is a part of the normal political process and is constitutionally legal. However, lust for power has permeated the ruling party and it is unable to reconcile with the fact that its leader has lost a majority in the National Assembly. Pakistan has never witnessed such political polarization.

Nearly four years down the lane, the credibility of the PTI regime is being questioned because the party wasted an opportunity to bring about change by resolving real issues.

Political parties are public entities whose activities affect public good. The people have a right to demand transparency. Given the sinking economy and the rapidly changing political situation in the region, a mature political leadership is essential.

Newspaper Link